---
layout: post-layout.html
title:  AI - The Death of Human Discovery In Speedrunning?
summary: My fleeting thoughts on the impact of AI models on discoveries in speedrunning as a whole.
date: 2024-10-16
tags:
  - ai/machine-learning
  - videogames
---
# {{ title }}

A few weeks ago, I watched [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cUojVsCJ51I) from YouTuber
[Linesight](https://www.youtube.com/@linesight-rl) about a new Machine Learning model that he trained to beat
Trackmania, an arcade racing game that's been around since 2003, world record player times. In the video, he talks about
how this ML model was able to find shortcuts and skips in a matter of hours, when the Trackmania community took up to 20
years to find these same time savers. That point stuck out to me in particular, it put a question into my head that I've
been stewing on ever since: *Is the oncoming increased use of these machine learning models going to rob us of the joy
that comes from human discovery?* Let me explain what I mean.

### I, am speed.

I love speedrunning, a lot. There is just something about people going as fast as humanly possible by any means
necessary that really actives my monkey brain neurons. Watching someone accomplish things that don't look even remotely
possible by human hands is downright impressive. Learning the often decades long history of these speedrunning
communities is fascinating. These runners dedicate thousands of hours honing their technique and skills to be the best
of the best. Not only does it require skills, but it also requires extensive game knowledge. Speedrunners will
absolutely tear a game to shreds, sponging up any knowledge there is to know about how these games work to get a leg up.

Personally, I feel one of the more hype moments in speedrunning communities is when something new in the game is
discovered. Be that a new route, a new mechanic, a newly found bug, or even a new way of holding the controller to be
just that *one* frame faster, they are large events in these communities that often leave permanent effects to the world
record time. These moments can be quick to come in the early stages of a game's life cycle as people find the more
obvious or easier mechanics, but as everything there is to discover gets found, new finds can be as sparse as once every
10 years, as it takes someone with either insane luck or insane knowledge and skill to find something like that. It is
often a true feat of human skill that leads to these discoveries. This makes it all the more exciting when someone
*does* find something. The community often goes into an absolute frenzy trying to either master the new skill, see how
the mechanic could be applied, or see if the route truly is shorter or not. That's all to say that these are large
events that can hype-up and shake-up a whole community of often tight-knit people

I fear that AI is at risk of taking that away from us...

### Another funny header

Back to that Trackmania video. In the video, he talks about the ML model's progression of improvement. At first, it
can't come close to world record track times, but as he improves the training method, it gets better. After several
iterations, it is setting its own world records, notably the map named A02, beating a record that stood for 6 years
previously. This isn't an instance of the model just having tighter lines and perfect inputs (it did, to be clear), but
*it found a faster route*, on a 10-year-old track that thousands of people have tried perfecting over that time. As far
as I am aware, that is unprecedented for these ML models. The rest of the video shows the model crushing the rest of the
human world records he tested against. To be clear, it is impressive and hats off to Linesight for the great work making
such a sophisticated model. But I'm worried about what happened in A02 specifically.

Are we going to get to a point where instead of dedicating time and energy to grinding these out, we rely on what the
"all mighty AI" shows us the most optimal route to take is? I fear that as these tools get better and better, and easier
and easier to use, more people will start incorporating these tools into learning how to speed run a game. I worry that
this is going to rob communities of new and exciting moments of watching someone discover something never thought of
before. Instead of spending the time and energy to thoroughly hunt for new routes, will we default to just throwing an
"AI" at the problem until we have the answer?

There is a tangent here about how this applies to creative endeavors more broadly that maybe I'll go down at time point,
but not today.

#### bUT wHaT aBOuT TAS?!?!?

Quick aside: I think TAS (Tool Assisted Speedruns) are different. They still require human input. Yes, they are
theoretically input perfect runs that no human could ever hope for, but they are limited by the creativity of the human
generating the TAS. A TAS will not discover and optimize on its own.

### Conclusion

I do fear for speedrunning. I don't actually know if anything I said is true. Maybe speedrunning will continue to thrive
completely unfazed, and I hope it does. I am just worried that yet another cool outlet for human achievement could be
potentially stripped from us like we are seeing companies trying to do to the other outlets I enjoy.

Please let me know what you think! This is my first ever "real" post I've written that's not technical. Its probably
really bad, so please take everything I say with a grain of salt. I enjoyed trying to flesh out this idea into something
worth reading, hopefully you agree :)
